maven/README.md, before:

# Maven deployment scripts

The purpose of these scripts is to produce a set of PGP-signed jars and
POM files for deployment to Maven Central.

  http://search.maven.org

Because the jogamp projects do not use Maven to manage their own builds
(and it would be too much work for very little gain to convert the build
system over to Maven), these scripts take an archive of already-released
jar files and produce renamed jar files and POM files as output, ready
for deployment to the repository.

These instructions assume that you know how
to use [GnuPG](https://www.gnupg.org/documentation/manuals/gnupg/Invoking-GPG.html#Invoking-GPG)
and set up the [GPG-Agent](https://www.gnupg.org/documentation/manuals/gnupg/Invoking-GPG_002dAGENT.html#Invoking-GPG_002dAGENT),
since we utilize the [gpg:sign-and-deploy-file](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-gpg-plugin/sign-and-deploy-file-mojo.html)
deployment method.

In order to get packages onto Maven Central, it's necessary to have an
account on one of the large Java "forges". The most-used one seems to be
Sonatype. See [Sonatype's Publisher Portal Guide](https://central.sonatype.org/publish/publish-portal-guide/)
for details on [register to publish](https://central.sonatype.org/register/central-portal/).
To handle the [Portal OSSRH Staging API](https://central.sonatype.org/publish/publish-portal-ossrh-staging-api/),
we use a [OSSRH Staging API (swagger)](https://ossrh-staging-api.central.sonatype.com/swagger-ui/) derived
[shell script functions](sonatype_api.sh).

We also publish via [wagon-ssh-external](https://maven.apache.org/wagon/wagon-providers/wagon-ssh-external/index.html)
on our [jogamp mirror](https://jogamp.org/deployment/maven/).

## Prerequisites

To also publish via [wagon-ssh-external](https://maven.apache.org/wagon/wagon-providers/wagon-ssh-external/index.html)
on our [jogamp mirror](https://jogamp.org/deployment/maven/) we require a patched
[maven-wagon](https://maven.apache.org/wagon/) module.

Clone `maven-wagon` branch [wagon-3.x](https://github.com/sgothel/maven-wagon/tree/wagon-3.x)
and install locally via

```
mvn install -Dmaven.test.skip
```

This satisfies out dependencies to `wagon-ssh-external` version `3.5.4-SNAPSHOT`,
as this version contains a required patch to allow processing relative file names.

- [patch](https://github.com/sgothel/maven-wagon/commit/e8ffd1535177b3aa00c4f726d92d957aa29cab31)
- [merge request](https://github.com/apache/maven-wagon/pull/817)

## Instructions

### Prepare input Source Files
Obtain the jogamp-all-platforms.7z release for the version
of jogamp you wish to deploy to Central. As an example, we'll
use 2.3.0. Unpack the 7z file to the 'input' subdirectory,
creating it if it doesn't exist:

```
$ mkdir input
$ cd input
$ wget http://jogamp.org/deployment/v2.3.0/archive/jogamp-all-platforms.7z
$ 7z x jogamp-all-platforms.7z
```

Switch back to the old directory:

```
$ cd ..
```

### Prepare Maven User Settings

Excerpt from our [$HOME/.m2/settings.xml](settings.jogamp.xml):

```
 <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
 <settings
   xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/SETTINGS/1.0.0"
   ... >
   <profiles>
     <profile>
       <id>jogamp-sonatype</id>
       <activation>
         <activeByDefault>false</activeByDefault> <!-- change this to false, if you don't like to have it on per default -->
         <property>
           <name>repositoryId</name>
           <value>jogamp-sonatype</value>
         </property>
       </activation>
       <properties>
         <gpg.useagent>true</gpg.useagent>
         <gpg.keyname>JogAmp Maven Deployment</gpg.keyname>
         <gpg.bestPractices>true</gpg.bestPractices>
       </properties>
       <repositories>
         <repository>
           <id>jogamp-sonatype</id>
           <name>jogamp sonatype</name>
           <url>https://ossrh-staging-api.central.sonatype.com/service/local/staging/deploy/maven2/</url>
           <layout>default</layout>
         </repository>
       </repositories>
     </profile>
   </profiles>
   <servers>
     <server>
       <id>jogamp-sonatype</id>
       <username>USERNAME</username>
       <password>PASSWORD</password>
     </server>
   </servers>

 </settings>
```

The Central repository requires PGP signatures on all files
deployed to the repository. Because we'll be signing a lot
of files, we need this to occur in the most automated manner
possible. Therefore, we need to tell Maven which PGP key to
use and also to tell it to use any running PGP agent we have.
To do this, we have to add a profile to [$HOME/.m2/settings.xml](settings.jogamp.xml)
that sets various properties that tell the PGP plugin what
to do.

We have defined a new profile called `jogamp-sonatype`,
which is enabled if the `repositoryId` equals `jogamp-sonatype`.

This profile enables the use of a PGP agent, and uses the string
`JogAmp Maven Deployment` to tell PGP which key to use.
You can obviously use the fingerprint of the key here too
(or anything else that uniquely identifies it).

See: http://www.sonatype.com/books/mvnref-book/reference/profiles.html

### Prepare output Upload Files

Now, run make.sh with the desired version number to generate POM
files and copy jar files to the correct places:

```
  $ ./make.sh 2.3.0
```

The scripts will have created an 'output' directory, containing
all the prepared releases. It's now necessary to deploy the releases,
one at a time [2]. Assuming that our Sonatype username is 'jogamp'
and our password is `********`, we need to edit settings.xml
to tell Maven to use them both, see `server` id `jogamp-sonatype` above.

### Deployment

#### Deployment to repositories other than Sonatype's OSSRH

To deploy an individual project to repositories other than Sonatype's OSSRH:

```
  $ export REPOSITORY_URL="scpexe://jogamp.org/srv/www/jogamp.org/deployment/maven/"
  $ export REPOSITORY_ID="jogamp-mirror"
  $ ./make-deploy-one.sh gluegen-rt-main 2.3.0
```

To deploy all of the projects listed in the folder `projects` to repositories other than Sonatype's OSSRH:

```
  $ export REPOSITORY_URL="scpexe://jogamp.org/srv/www/jogamp.org/deployment/maven/"
  $ export REPOSITORY_ID="jogamp-mirror"
  $ ./make-deploy.sh 2.3.0
```

The scripts will upload all necessary jars, poms, signatures, etc.

#### Deployment to Sonatype's OSSRH

To manage the staging upload on [Sonatype's Portal OSSRH Staging](https://central.sonatype.org/publish/publish-portal-ossrh-staging-api/),
we injext [API command](sonatype_api.sh) within [make-deploy-sonatype.sh](make-deploy-sonatype.sh).
Thereofor, to deploy on Sonatype's OSSRH use:

```
  $ ./make-deploy-sonatype.sh 2.3.0
```

This shall upload to staging, release taging to central namespace and also
bring the validated packages into `publishing` state. The latter may take time,
but eventually move into state `published`.


To manage the Sonatype repository, e.g. see the `publishing`, `published` or `failed`
packages we shall log-in to https://central.sonatype.com/account.

Click 'Publish' in the top navigation bar, now you should see the successfully

## Projects

The way that Maven works demanded a certain structure to the projects
produced. The requirements were:

- The end-user of the jogamp projects released to the repository
  must not have to do anything beyond adding one or two dependencies
  to their own projects. Everything must work using only the basic
  dependency resolution mechanism that Maven supports and must not
  require anything complex in the way of build scripts.

- The way that jogamp projects locate their own jar files must
  work as it always had.

The first requirement was reasonably easy to satisfy (and the details
of which will be covered shortly). The second requirement was complicated
by the fact that Maven unconditionally appends version numbers to jar
files (and requires the numbers to be present in order for the dependency
resolution to work). After trying various approaches, a small change was
made to the jogamp code in order to allow it to cope with version numbers,
and the Maven projects were carefully structured to produce jar files
with usable names. In other words, we had to essentially write Maven
POM files that, when "deployed", produced jar files with the correct
names, using a variety of tricks. The other issue was that jogamp implicitly
assumed that all of the jar files would be in the same directory, whereas
Maven essentially assumes one directory per jar file.

We ended up with the following structure: For each part of jogamp that
had associated native binaries (contained within jar files), a project
was created. Then, using the "classifiers" [3], each of the native jar
files were deployed along with the main jar file for each project. Using
'gluegen-rt' as an example:

- The main jar file as part of jogamp is "gluegen-rt.jar". When
  "deployed" by Maven, this becomes "gluegen-rt-${VERSION}.jar".

- Each native jar file associated with gluegen-rt is named
  "gluegen-rt-natives-${OS}-${ARCH}.jar". We use "classifiers" to
  get Maven to "deploy" jar files with the correct names:

```
    PLATFORMS="linux-amd64 linux-i586 ..."
    for PLATFORM in ${PLATFORMS}
    do
      CLASS="natives-${PLATFORM}"
      mvn gpg:sign-and-deploy-file \
        -Dfile="gluegen-rt-${VERSION}-natives-${PLATFORM}.jar \
        -Dclassifier="natives-${PLATFORM}"
    done
```

Assuming version 2.3.0, this results in:

- gluegen-rt-2.3.0.jar
- gluegen-rt-2.3.0-natives-linux-amd64.jar
- gluegen-rt-2.3.0-natives-linux-i586.jar
- ...

This results in a project with a main jar and a set of native jar
files, each with the correct name and version. As the native jar
files are implicitly part of the same "project", they're deployed
in the same directory as the main jar file, and the jogamp code can
locate them without issue.

The problem with this approach is that the end-user would have
to add an explicit dependency on "gluegen-rt" and each and every
one of the associated native jars in their project's POM file! The
simplest solution for this problem was to create a second project
that contained explicit dependencies on all of the classified jar
files of the first. The end-user then simply adds a dependency on
this second project instead of the first, and everything is resolved
automatically by Maven. This second project also contains an empty
"dummy" jar file in order to allow Maven to deploy it to repositories.

With that in mind, each part of Maven therefore has an associated
"-main" project, meant to be used by end-users. This "-main" project,
when added to the dependencies of any project, pulls in all of the
real jogamp jars, native or otherwise.

## Test suite

The scripts now include a basic test suite for checking that the
produced packages actually work in Maven.

Assuming that the packages have been created with the ./make.sh script
above:

  1. Generate project files for the tests:

```
    $ ./make-tests.sh 2.3.0
```

  2. Deploy packages to a local directory for the unit tests
     to use:

```
     $ ./make-tests-deploy.sh 2.3.0
```

  3. Run the tests.

```
    $ ./make-tests-run.sh
```

## Notes

We're currently uploading empty jar files for the "sources" and
"javadoc" jars required by Central. The rules state that these
files are required unconditionally, but may be empty in the case
that there aren't sources or javadoc. It'd be nice to provide real
sources and javadoc one day.

## References

- [GnuPG](https://www.gnupg.org/documentation/manuals/gnupg/index.html)
  - [Invoking GPG](https://www.gnupg.org/documentation/manuals/gnupg/Invoking-GPG.html#Invoking-GPG)
  - [Invoking GPG-Agent](https://www.gnupg.org/documentation/manuals/gnupg/Invoking-GPG_002dAGENT.html#Invoking-GPG_002dAGENT)
- [Sonatype: Publisher Portal Guide](https://central.sonatype.org/publish/publish-portal-guide/)
  - [Register to Publish](https://central.sonatype.org/register/central-portal/)
  - [Publishing By Using the Portal OSSRH Staging API](https://central.sonatype.org/publish/publish-portal-ossrh-staging-api/)
  - [OSSRH Staging API (swagger)](https://ossrh-staging-api.central.sonatype.com/swagger-ui/)
- [Apache Maven](https://maven.apache.org/index.html)
  - [Deploy Plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-deploy-plugin/)
  - [Deploy an artifact with classifier](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-deploy-plugin/examples/deploying-with-classifiers.html)
  - [gpg:sign-and-deploy-file](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-gpg-plugin/sign-and-deploy-file-mojo.html)
  - [maven-wagon](https://maven.apache.org/wagon/)
    - [wagon-ssh-external](https://maven.apache.org/wagon/wagon-providers/wagon-ssh-external/index.html)
    - [source](https://github.com/apache/maven-wagon)
      - [patched branch wagon-3.x](https://github.com/sgothel/maven-wagon/tree/wagon-3.x)

Commit message:

Reference my blog `Publishing on Sonatype’s Central Maven Repo`

maven/README.md, after:

# Maven deployment scripts

The purpose of these scripts is to produce a set of PGP-signed jars and
POM files for [deployment to Maven Central](http://search.maven.org).

Because the jogamp projects do not use Maven to manage their own builds
(and it would be too much work for very little gain to convert the build
system over to Maven), these scripts take an archive of already-released
jar files and produce renamed jar files and POM files as output, ready
for deployment to the repository.

These instructions assume that you know how
to use [GnuPG](https://www.gnupg.org/documentation/manuals/gnupg/Invoking-GPG.html#Invoking-GPG)
and set up the [GPG-Agent](https://www.gnupg.org/documentation/manuals/gnupg/Invoking-GPG_002dAGENT.html#Invoking-GPG_002dAGENT),
since we utilize the [gpg:sign-and-deploy-file](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-gpg-plugin/sign-and-deploy-file-mojo.html)
deployment method.

In order to get packages onto Maven Central, it's necessary to have an
account on one of the large Java "forges". The most-used one seems to be
Sonatype. See [Sonatype's Publisher Portal Guide](https://central.sonatype.org/publish/publish-portal-guide/)
for details on [register to publish](https://central.sonatype.org/register/central-portal/).
To handle the [Portal OSSRH Staging API](https://central.sonatype.org/publish/publish-portal-ossrh-staging-api/),
we use a [OSSRH Staging API (swagger)](https://ossrh-staging-api.central.sonatype.com/swagger-ui/) derived
[shell script functions](sonatype_api.sh).

You may also want to read [Publishing on Sonatype’s Central Maven Repo](https://jausoft.com/blog/2025/09/07/publishing-on-sonatypes-central-maven-repo/)
detailing the [Portal OSSRH Staging API](https://central.sonatype.org/publish/publish-portal-ossrh-staging-api/)
within the regular Maven deployment process via [gpg:sign-and-deploy-file](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-gpg-plugin/sign-and-deploy-file-mojo.html).

We also publish via [wagon-ssh-external](https://maven.apache.org/wagon/wagon-providers/wagon-ssh-external/index.html)
on our [jogamp mirror](https://jogamp.org/deployment/maven/).

## Prerequisites

To also publish via [wagon-ssh-external](https://maven.apache.org/wagon/wagon-providers/wagon-ssh-external/index.html)
on our [jogamp mirror](https://jogamp.org/deployment/maven/) we require a patched
[maven-wagon](https://maven.apache.org/wagon/) module.

Clone `maven-wagon` branch [wagon-3.x](https://github.com/sgothel/maven-wagon/tree/wagon-3.x)
and install locally via

```
mvn install -Dmaven.test.skip
```

This satisfies out dependencies to `wagon-ssh-external` version `3.5.4-SNAPSHOT`,
as this version contains a required patch to allow processing relative file names.

- [patch](https://github.com/sgothel/maven-wagon/commit/e8ffd1535177b3aa00c4f726d92d957aa29cab31)
- [merge request](https://github.com/apache/maven-wagon/pull/817)

## Instructions

### Prepare input Source Files
Obtain the jogamp-all-platforms.7z release for the version
of jogamp you wish to deploy to Central. As an example, we'll
use 2.3.0. Unpack the 7z file to the 'input' subdirectory,
creating it if it doesn't exist:

```
$ mkdir input
$ cd input
$ wget http://jogamp.org/deployment/v2.3.0/archive/jogamp-all-platforms.7z
$ 7z x jogamp-all-platforms.7z
```

Switch back to the old directory:

```
$ cd ..
```

### Prepare Maven User Settings

Excerpt from our [$HOME/.m2/settings.xml](settings.jogamp.xml):

```
 <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
 <settings
   xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/SETTINGS/1.0.0"
   ... >
   <profiles>
     <profile>
       <id>jogamp-sonatype</id>
       <activation>
         <activeByDefault>false</activeByDefault> <!-- change this to false, if you don't like to have it on per default -->
         <property>
           <name>repositoryId</name>
           <value>jogamp-sonatype</value>
         </property>
       </activation>
       <properties>
         <gpg.useagent>true</gpg.useagent>
         <gpg.keyname>JogAmp Maven Deployment</gpg.keyname>
         <gpg.bestPractices>true</gpg.bestPractices>
       </properties>
       <repositories>
         <repository>
           <id>jogamp-sonatype</id>
           <name>jogamp sonatype</name>
           <url>https://ossrh-staging-api.central.sonatype.com/service/local/staging/deploy/maven2/</url>
           <layout>default</layout>
         </repository>
       </repositories>
     </profile>
   </profiles>
   <servers>
     <server>
       <id>jogamp-sonatype</id>
       <username>USERNAME</username>
       <password>PASSWORD</password>
     </server>
   </servers>

 </settings>
```

The Central repository requires PGP signatures on all files
deployed to the repository. Because we'll be signing a lot
of files, we need this to occur in the most automated manner
possible. Therefore, we need to tell Maven which PGP key to
use and also to tell it to use any running PGP agent we have.
To do this, we have to add a profile to [$HOME/.m2/settings.xml](settings.jogamp.xml)
that sets various properties that tell the PGP plugin what
to do.

We have defined a new profile called `jogamp-sonatype`,
which is enabled if the `repositoryId` equals `jogamp-sonatype`.

This profile enables the use of a PGP agent, and uses the string
`JogAmp Maven Deployment` to tell PGP which key to use.
You can obviously use the fingerprint of the key here too
(or anything else that uniquely identifies it).

See: http://www.sonatype.com/books/mvnref-book/reference/profiles.html

### Prepare output Upload Files

Now, run make.sh with the desired version number to generate POM
files and copy jar files to the correct places:

```
  $ ./make.sh 2.3.0
```

The scripts will have created an 'output' directory, containing
all the prepared releases. It's now necessary to deploy the releases,
one at a time [2]. Assuming that our Sonatype username is 'jogamp'
and our password is `********`, we need to edit settings.xml
to tell Maven to use them both, see `server` id `jogamp-sonatype` above.

### Deployment

#### Deployment to repositories other than Sonatype's OSSRH

To deploy an individual project to repositories other than Sonatype's OSSRH:

```
  $ export REPOSITORY_URL="scpexe://jogamp.org/srv/www/jogamp.org/deployment/maven/"
  $ export REPOSITORY_ID="jogamp-mirror"
  $ ./make-deploy-one.sh gluegen-rt-main 2.3.0
```

To deploy all of the projects listed in the folder `projects` to repositories other than Sonatype's OSSRH:

```
  $ export REPOSITORY_URL="scpexe://jogamp.org/srv/www/jogamp.org/deployment/maven/"
  $ export REPOSITORY_ID="jogamp-mirror"
  $ ./make-deploy.sh 2.3.0
```

The scripts will upload all necessary jars, poms, signatures, etc.

#### Deployment to Sonatype's OSSRH

To manage the staging upload on [Sonatype's Portal OSSRH Staging](https://central.sonatype.org/publish/publish-portal-ossrh-staging-api/),
we injext [API command](sonatype_api.sh) within [make-deploy-sonatype.sh](make-deploy-sonatype.sh).
Thereofor, to deploy on Sonatype's OSSRH use:

```
  $ ./make-deploy-sonatype.sh 2.3.0
```

This shall upload to staging, release taging to central namespace and also
bring the validated packages into `publishing` state. The latter may take time,
but eventually move into state `published`.


To manage the Sonatype repository, e.g. see the `publishing`, `published` or `failed`
packages we shall log-in to https://central.sonatype.com/account.

Click 'Publish' in the top navigation bar, now you should see the successfully

## Projects

The way that Maven works demanded a certain structure to the projects
produced. The requirements were:

- The end-user of the jogamp projects released to the repository
  must not have to do anything beyond adding one or two dependencies
  to their own projects. Everything must work using only the basic
  dependency resolution mechanism that Maven supports and must not
  require anything complex in the way of build scripts.

- The way that jogamp projects locate their own jar files must
  work as it always had.

The first requirement was reasonably easy to satisfy (and the details
of which will be covered shortly). The second requirement was complicated
by the fact that Maven unconditionally appends version numbers to jar
files (and requires the numbers to be present in order for the dependency
resolution to work). After trying various approaches, a small change was
made to the jogamp code in order to allow it to cope with version numbers,
and the Maven projects were carefully structured to produce jar files
with usable names. In other words, we had to essentially write Maven
POM files that, when "deployed", produced jar files with the correct
names, using a variety of tricks. The other issue was that jogamp implicitly
assumed that all of the jar files would be in the same directory, whereas
Maven essentially assumes one directory per jar file.

We ended up with the following structure: For each part of jogamp that
had associated native binaries (contained within jar files), a project
was created. Then, using the "classifiers" [3], each of the native jar
files were deployed along with the main jar file for each project. Using
'gluegen-rt' as an example:

- The main jar file as part of jogamp is "gluegen-rt.jar". When
  "deployed" by Maven, this becomes "gluegen-rt-${VERSION}.jar".

- Each native jar file associated with gluegen-rt is named
  "gluegen-rt-natives-${OS}-${ARCH}.jar". We use "classifiers" to
  get Maven to "deploy" jar files with the correct names:

```
    PLATFORMS="linux-amd64 linux-i586 ..."
    for PLATFORM in ${PLATFORMS}
    do
      CLASS="natives-${PLATFORM}"
      mvn gpg:sign-and-deploy-file \
        -Dfile="gluegen-rt-${VERSION}-natives-${PLATFORM}.jar \
        -Dclassifier="natives-${PLATFORM}"
    done
```

Assuming version 2.3.0, this results in:

- gluegen-rt-2.3.0.jar
- gluegen-rt-2.3.0-natives-linux-amd64.jar
- gluegen-rt-2.3.0-natives-linux-i586.jar
- ...

This results in a project with a main jar and a set of native jar
files, each with the correct name and version. As the native jar
files are implicitly part of the same "project", they're deployed
in the same directory as the main jar file, and the jogamp code can
locate them without issue.

The problem with this approach is that the end-user would have
to add an explicit dependency on "gluegen-rt" and each and every
one of the associated native jars in their project's POM file! The
simplest solution for this problem was to create a second project
that contained explicit dependencies on all of the classified jar
files of the first. The end-user then simply adds a dependency on
this second project instead of the first, and everything is resolved
automatically by Maven. This second project also contains an empty
"dummy" jar file in order to allow Maven to deploy it to repositories.

With that in mind, each part of Maven therefore has an associated
"-main" project, meant to be used by end-users. This "-main" project,
when added to the dependencies of any project, pulls in all of the
real jogamp jars, native or otherwise.

## Test suite

The scripts now include a basic test suite for checking that the
produced packages actually work in Maven.

Assuming that the packages have been created with the ./make.sh script
above:

  1. Generate project files for the tests:

```
    $ ./make-tests.sh 2.3.0
```

  2. Deploy packages to a local directory for the unit tests
     to use:

```
     $ ./make-tests-deploy.sh 2.3.0
```

  3. Run the tests.

```
    $ ./make-tests-run.sh
```

## Notes

We're currently uploading empty jar files for the "sources" and
"javadoc" jars required by Central. The rules state that these
files are required unconditionally, but may be empty in the case
that there aren't sources or javadoc. It'd be nice to provide real
sources and javadoc one day.

## References

- [GnuPG](https://www.gnupg.org/documentation/manuals/gnupg/index.html)
  - [Invoking GPG](https://www.gnupg.org/documentation/manuals/gnupg/Invoking-GPG.html#Invoking-GPG)
  - [Invoking GPG-Agent](https://www.gnupg.org/documentation/manuals/gnupg/Invoking-GPG_002dAGENT.html#Invoking-GPG_002dAGENT)
- [Sonatype: Publisher Portal Guide](https://central.sonatype.org/publish/publish-portal-guide/)
  - [Register to Publish](https://central.sonatype.org/register/central-portal/)
  - [Publishing By Using the Portal OSSRH Staging API](https://central.sonatype.org/publish/publish-portal-ossrh-staging-api/)
  - [OSSRH Staging API (swagger)](https://ossrh-staging-api.central.sonatype.com/swagger-ui/)
  - [Publishing on Sonatype’s Central Maven Repo](https://jausoft.com/blog/2025/09/07/publishing-on-sonatypes-central-maven-repo/)
- [Apache Maven](https://maven.apache.org/index.html)
  - [Deploy Plugin](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-deploy-plugin/)
  - [Deploy an artifact with classifier](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-deploy-plugin/examples/deploying-with-classifiers.html)
  - [gpg:sign-and-deploy-file](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-gpg-plugin/sign-and-deploy-file-mojo.html)
  - [maven-wagon](https://maven.apache.org/wagon/)
    - [wagon-ssh-external](https://maven.apache.org/wagon/wagon-providers/wagon-ssh-external/index.html)
    - [source](https://github.com/apache/maven-wagon)
      - [patched branch wagon-3.x](https://github.com/sgothel/maven-wagon/tree/wagon-3.x)
