jausoft@jausoft.com     sgothel
root@jausoft.com        sgothel
postmaster@jausoft.com  sgothel
webmaster@jausoft.com   sgothel
info@jausoft.com        sgothel
admin@jausoft.com       sgothel
jogl@jausoft.com        sgothel
jogamp@jausoft.com      sgothel

sven@jausoft.com        sgothel
sven.gothel@jausoft.com sgothel
sgothel@jausoft.com     sgothel
sgothel01@jausoft.com   sgothel
sgothel02@jausoft.com   sgothel
sgothel03@jausoft.com   sgothel
sgothel04@jausoft.com   sgothel
jau@jausoft.com         sgothel
svende@jausoft.com      sgothel
fax@jausoft.com         sgothel

qgothel@jausoft.com     qgothel
qzhang@jausoft.com      qgothel
qun@jausoft.com         qgothel

kgothel@jausoft.com     kgothel
kirstingothel@jausoft.com  kgothel
kirstingoethel@jausoft.com kgothel

rsantina@jausoft.com    rsantina
wbaumann@jausoft.com    wbaumann

@jausoft.com    nirvana
@jausoft.ca     nirvana
